
# OpenDataProtect Specification

#### Version 1.0.0

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) [RFC2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119) [RFC8174](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document is licensed under [The Apache License, Version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html).

## Introduction

The OpenDataProtect (ODP) Specification defines a standard, language-agnostic interface to record of data processing which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the personal data processing. When properly defined, a consumer can understand and interact with the remote service with a minimal amount of implementation logic.

The specification can be used to make the records of processing available publicly.

## Table of Contents

- [Definitions](#definitions)
	- [OpenDataProtect Document](#ODPDocument)
	- [Path Templating](#pathTemplating)
	- [Media Types](#mediaTypes)
- [Specification](#specification)
	- [Versions](#versions)
	- [Format](#format)
	- [Document Structure](#documentStructure)
	- [Data Types](#dataTypes)
	- [Rich Text Formatting](#richText)
	- [Relative References In URLs](#relativeReferences)
	- [Schema](#schema)
		- [OpenDataProtect Object](#ODPObject)
		- [Record Object](#recordObject)
		- [Person Object](#personObject)
		- [DataProcessing Object](#licenseObject)
		- [Purpose Object](#serverObject)
		- [Subject Object](#serverVariableObject)
		- [PersonalDataCategory Object](#componentsObject)
		- [Recipient Object](#recipientObject)
		- [PersonalDataField Object](#personalDataFieldObject)
		- [Transfer Object](#transferObject)
		- [Application Object](#applicationObject)
	- [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions)
- [Appendix A: Revision History](#revisionHistory)
	

<!-- /TOC -->

## Definitions

##### <a name="odpDocument"></a>OpenDataProtect Document
A document (or set of documents) that defines or describes an API. An OpenDataProtect definition uses and conforms to the OpenDataProtect Specification.

##### <a name="pathTemplating"></a>Path Templating
Path templating refers to the usage of curly braces ({}) to mark a section of a URL path as replaceable using path parameters.

##### <a name="mediaTypes"></a>Media Types
Media type definitions are spread across several resources.
The media type definitions SHOULD be in compliance with [RFC6838](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6838).

## Specification

### Versions

The OpenDataProtect Specification is versioned using [Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) (semver) and follows the semver specification.

The `major`.`minor` portion of the semver (for example `1.0`) SHALL designate the ODP feature set. Typically, *`.patch`* versions address errors in this document, not the feature set. Tooling which supports ODP 1.0 SHOULD be compatible with all ODP 1.0.\* versions. The patch version SHOULD NOT be considered by tooling, making no distinction between `1.0.0` and `1.0.1` for example.

Subsequent minor version releases of the OpenDataProtect Specification (incrementing the `minor` version number) SHOULD NOT interfere with tooling developed to a lower minor version and same major version.  Thus a hypothetical `1.1.0` specification SHOULD be usable with tooling designed for `1.0.0`.

An OpenDataProtect document compatible with ODP 1.\*.\* contains a required [`OpenDataProtect`](#ODPVersion) field which designates the semantic version of the ODP that it uses. (ODP 2.0 documents contain a top-level version field named [`swagger`](https://github.com/OAI/OpenDataProtect-Specification/blob/master/versions/2.0.md#swaggerObject) and value `"2.0"`.)

### Format

An OpenDataProtect document that conforms to the OpenDataProtect Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

For example, if a field has an array value, the JSON array representation will be used:

```json
{
   "field": [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
```
All field names in the specification are **case sensitive**.

The schema exposes two types of fields: Fixed fields, which have a declared name, and Patterned fields, which declare a regex pattern for the field name.

Patterned fields MUST have unique names within the containing object. 

In order to preserve the ability to round-trip between YAML and JSON formats, YAML version [1.2](http://www.yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html) is RECOMMENDED along with some additional constraints:

- Tags MUST be limited to those allowed by the [JSON Schema ruleset](http://www.yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803231).
- Keys used in YAML maps MUST be limited to a scalar string, as defined by the [YAML Failsafe schema ruleset](http://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2802346).

**Note:** While APIs may be defined by OpenDataProtect documents in either YAML or JSON format, the API request and response bodies and other content are not required to be JSON or YAML.

### <a name="documentStructure"></a>Document Structure

An OpenDataProtect document MAY be made up of a single document or be divided into multiple, connected parts at the discretion of the user. In the latter case, `$ref` fields MUST be used in the specification to reference those parts as follows from the [JSON Schema](http://json-schema.org) definitions.

It is RECOMMENDED that the root OpenDataProtect document be named: `OpenDataProtect.json` or `OpenDataProtect.yaml`.

### <a name="dataTypes"></a>Data Types

Primitive data types in the ODP are based on the types supported by the [JSON Schema Specification Wright Draft 00](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-wright-json-schema-00#section-4.2). 
Note that `integer` as a type is also supported and is defined as a JSON number without a fraction or exponent part. 
`null` is not supported as a type (see [`nullable`](#schemaNullable) for an alternative solution).
Models are defined using the [Schema Object](#schemaObject), which is an extended subset of JSON Schema Specification Wright Draft 00.

<a name="dataTypeFormat"></a>Primitives have an optional modifier property: `format`.
ODP uses several known formats to define in fine detail the data type being used.
However, to support documentation needs, the `format` property is an open `string`-valued property, and can have any value.
Formats such as `"email"`, `"uuid"`, and so on, MAY be used even though undefined by this specification.
Types that are not accompanied by a `format` property follow the type definition in the JSON Schema. Tools that do not recognize a specific `format` MAY default back to the `type` alone, as if the `format` is not specified.

The formats defined by the ODP are:

Common Name | [`type`](#dataTypes) | [`format`](#dataTypeFormat) | Comments
----------- | ------ | -------- | --------
integer | `integer` | `int32` | signed 32 bits
long | `integer` | `int64` | signed 64 bits
float | `number` | `float` | |
double | `number` | `double` | |
string | `string` | | |
byte | `string` | `byte` | base64 encoded characters
binary | `string` | `binary` | any sequence of octets
boolean | `boolean` | | |
date | `string` | `date` | As defined by `full-date` - [RFC3339](http://xml2rfc.ietf.org/public/rfc/html/rfc3339.html#anchor14)
dateTime | `string` | `date-time` | As defined by `date-time` - [RFC3339](http://xml2rfc.ietf.org/public/rfc/html/rfc3339.html#anchor14)
password | `string` | `password` | A hint to UIs to obscure input.

### <a name="richText"></a>Rich Text Formatting
Throughout the specification `description` fields are noted as supporting CommonMark markdown formatting.
Where OpenDataProtect tooling renders rich text it MUST support, at a minimum, markdown syntax as described by [CommonMark 0.27](http://spec.commonmark.org/0.27/). Tooling MAY choose to ignore some CommonMark features to address security concerns. 

### <a name="relativeReferences"></a>Relative References in URLs

Unless specified otherwise, all properties that are URLs MAY be relative references as defined by [RFC3986](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-4.2).
Relative references are resolved using the URLs defined in the [`Server Object`](#serverObject) as a Base URI.

Relative references used in `$ref` are processed as per [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03), using the URL of the current document as the base URI. See also the [Reference Object](#referenceObject).

### Schema

In the following description, if a field is not explicitly **REQUIRED** or described with a MUST or SHALL, it can be considered OPTIONAL.

#### <a name="OrganizationObject"></a>Organization Object

This is the root document object of the [OpenDataProtect document](#ODPDocument).
This document may content one or more Records of processing

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="ODPVersion"></a>OpenDataProtect | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [semantic version number](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) of the [OpenDataProtect Specification version](#versions) that the OpenDataProtect document uses. The `OpenDataProtect` field SHOULD be used by tooling specifications and clients to interpret the OpenDataProtect document. This is *not* related to the API [`info.version`](#infoVersion) string.
<a name="ODPInfo"></a>info | [Info Object](#infoObject) | **REQUIRED**. Provides metadata about the API. The metadata MAY be used by tooling as required.
<a name="ODPServers"></a>servers | [[Server Object](#serverObject)] | An array of Server Objects, which provide connectivity information to a target server. If the `servers` property is not provided, or is an empty array, the default value would be a [Server Object](#serverObject) with a [url](#serverUrl) value of `/`.
<a name="ODPPaths"></a>paths | [Paths Object](#pathsObject) | **REQUIRED**. The available paths and operations for the API.
<a name="ODPComponents"></a>components | [Components Object](#componentsObject) | An element to hold various schemas for the specification.
<a name="ODPSecurity"></a>security | [[Security Requirement Object](#securityRequirementObject)] | A declaration of which security mechanisms can be used across the API. The list of values includes alternative security requirement objects that can be used. Only one of the security requirement objects need to be satisfied to authorize a request. Individual operations can override this definition.
<a name="ODPTags"></a>tags | [[Tag Object](#tagObject)] | A list of tags used by the specification with additional metadata. The order of the tags can be used to reflect on their order by the parsing tools. Not all tags that are used by the [Operation Object](#operationObject) must be declared. The tags that are not declared MAY be organized randomly or based on the tools' logic. Each tag name in the list MUST be unique.
<a name="ODPExternalDocs"></a>externalDocs | [External Documentation Object](#externalDocumentationObject) | Additional external documentation.

#### <a name="recordObject"></a>Record Object

The object provides a global description of the record. It represents a subset of organization like a subsidiary company

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="recordId"></a>id | `string` | **REQUIRED**. The internal id of the company.
<a name="recordLabel"></a>label | `string` | **REQUIRED**. The name of the company or natural person.
<a name="recordDescription"></a>description | `string` | A short description of the application. [CommonMark syntax](http://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation.
<a name="recordDataProcessing"></a>contact | [Person Object](#contactObject) | The contact information for the exposed API.
<a name="recordVersion"></a>version | `string` | The version of the OpenDataProtect document (which is distinct from the [OpenDataProtect Specification version](#ODPVersion) or the API implementation version).


This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

##### Info Record Example:

```json
{
  "id":"123",
  "label": "Pet Store",
  "description": "This is a sample record for a pet store",
  "dataProtectionOfficer": {
    "id":"123",
    "type": "natural",
    "name":"John Snow"
  },
  "dataController": {
    "id":"123",
    "type": "legal",
    "name":"Pet Store SAS"
  },
  "UERepresentative": {
    "id":"123",
    "type": "legal",
    "name":"Pet Store SAS"
  },
  "dataProcessing": [
    { "id":"..." }
  ],
  "version": "1.0.1"
}
```

```yaml
title: Pet Store
description: This is a sample server for a pet store.
version: 1.0.1
dataProtectionOfficer: 
  id: 123
  type: legal
  name: Pet Store sas
dataController:
  id: 123
  type: legal
  name: John Snow
```

#### <a name="personObject"></a>Person Object

A person can be a legal or natural.

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="personId"></a>id | `string` | **REQUIRED** The identifying name of the contact person/organization.
<a name="personType"></a>type | `string` | **REQUIRED** Possible values are natural or legal
<a name="personName"></a>name | `string` | **REQUIRED** The identifying name of the contact person/organization.
<a name="personUrl"></a>url | `string` | The URL pointing to the person informations or website. MUST be in the format of a URL.
<a name="personEmail"></a>email | `string` | The email address of the contact person/organization. MUST be in the format of an email address.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

##### Person Object Example:

```json
{
  "id": "123",
  "type": "legal",
  "name": "API Support",
  "url": "http://www.example.com/support",
  "email": "support@example.com"
}
```

```yaml
id: 123
type: legal
name: API Support
url: http://www.example.com/support
email: support@example.com
```

### <a name="specificationExtensions"></a>Specification Extensions

While the OpenDataProtect Specification tries to accommodate most use cases, additional data can be added to extend the specification at certain points.
You are free to add fields to the json at your convenience.

## <a name="revisionHistory"></a>Appendix A: Revision History

Version   | Date       | Notes
---       | ---        | ---
1.0       | 2020-09-25 | First release of the OpenDataProtect specification